Avni Infrastructure Overview
This document outlines the infrastructure, security and privacy features of Avni.
Last updated: 30-Dec-2025

About Avni
Avni is an open-source platform built for community service and data collection. It has been
recognised as Digital Public Good by the UN Digital Public Goods Alliance. Key features of Avni
include:
1.​ Offline: Avni has an Android application that works completely offline with two-way sync
support. When in -network, the users can sync - which pulls configuration and data from
the server on cloud and pushes data captured locally.
2.​ Rich Case Modelling: Avni supports creating a custom data model for case
management and longitudinal tracking using entities like subject types, programs and
encounters. This will help in easily creating the required framework for setting a reporting
tool.
3.​ Powerful forms: The data is collected using easily configurable forms. The forms
support all standard data types including GPS location, image, video and audio.
4.​ Multilingual: The app can be developed in English and then easily converted into local
languages like Assamese by uploading translations. Both android and the web based
data entry application support entering and viewing data in regional language. User
settings are provided to set the default language.
5.​ Location Hierarchy: We can easily setup location hierarchy and record data against
this. E.g. State -> District -> Village -> Household
6.​ Users and Catchment: Users can be easily created in the system and mapped to
different geographical regions so that data only limited to that geographical region is
available in the android application. E.g. A frontline worker can be mapped to a single
village and supervisors can be mapped to block or district.
7.​ Bulk data upload and export: Avni supports downloading data in longitudinal format.
This allows the users to extract raw data to perform analysis using tools like Excel,
SPSS, Strata or R. Avni also has an ability to upload bulk data using CSV files.
8.​ Security: All the access is behind login screens. All the data is stored on encrypted
disks. Users can be set up with Roles and Permissions.
9.​ Features for better coordination and engagement with Users: Avni provides features
like Approval Workflow, News broadcast and an issue resolution framework to better
engagement with users, coordinate the work and ensure data quality.
10.​Health Specific Features like Vaccination Tracking and Growth Chart plotting in the
health worker mobile application.

1

Component architecture
The Avni suite has the following components
●​ Field app (Android) - Avni app deployed on the Android PlayStore. All field users work
on the field app.
●​ Administration app and App Designer (Web) - Web application hosted on
app.avniproject.org - This is used by administrators and app designers. Primary
purposes include csv uploads, creation of users/locations, and changing form definitions.
●​ Avni server - Primary API server hosted on app.avniproject.org.
●​ Rules Server - Meant to run Javascript rules that are built for the application
●​ Media Server - Handles the Media search mechanism on Avni
●​ ETL Server - ETL service. Transforms primary data to formats easier for reporting
●​ Integration Server - Takes care of integration with external systems
●​ BI Server - An instance of Metabase and another of Superset. These provide
dashboards

2

Notes
●​ The Android and web applications interact with the server through API interfaces.
●​ Identity is established through jwt tokens provided by the Identity Server (Amazon
Cognito).
●​ All non-media is stored in the postgres database. The database also stores report
definitions for the reports and denormalized tables for use by reports.
●​ Media is stored in S3

Network Architecture

Notes
●​ The infra is hosted on AWS Mumbai servers
●​ WAF protects against DDoS attacks
●​ SSL termination takes place at the Application Load Balancer before being routed to the
right server.
●​ Infra capacity is provided along with the components in the diagram
●​ All EC2 servers run Ubuntu

3

●​ All services run on systemd as services
●​ Deployment happens through CircleCI

Data Flow

External sdks
Name

Vendor

Purpose

Data handled

Service Terms

Cognito

AWS

Identity Server

Identity of user
(user id,
password,
phone number)

https://aws.amaz
on.com/service-t
erms/

APM

NewRelic

Server
monitoring

Code
https://newrelic.c
instrumentation
om/termsandcon
(execution stack, ditions/terms

4

server response
times, base urls)
Bugsnag

SmartBear

Error
management

Stack traces,
username,
phone
characteristics
such as version,
memory etc

https://smartbear
.com/terms-of-us
e/

Firebase

Google

Analytics

Performance of
page views,
events

https://marketing
platform.google.
com/about/analy
tics/terms/us/

Notes:
●​ All sdks that send data outside the data center are provided here
●​ No information about beneficiaries is shared with any of the tools mentioned above

Security measures
Summary
Area

Item

Implementation Details

Data Security

Encryption at Rest (mobile app)

AES-256 (needs to be enabled
for an organisation)

Encryption at Rest (server)

AES-256 Encrypted by AWS

Encryption at Rest (backups)

AES-256 Encrypted by AWS

Encryption of data in transit
(public network)

TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_
128_GCM_SHA256, 128 bit
keys, TLS 1.2

Data in transit (within VPC)

Trusted

Database backups

Point in Time recovery for 35
days for the database

Data residence

AWS Mumbai data centers

5

App Security

Infrastructure

Network Security

Deployment

Contracts

Audits

Login

Open ID Connect (OIDC) using
Amazon Cognito. JWTs for
authentication everywhere

Token expiry

1 hour

Role based Access Control

Present. Can be modified by
admins.

Upgrades

Regular upgrades to application
packages

Infrastructure access

MFA mandatory. Access logged.
Ssh access through keys
(nopasswd)

Access logging

AWS Cloudwatch

Firewall

WAF enabled

Databases

Within private subnet

Routing through subnets

Implemented via AWS Security
Groups

Secrets management for server

Encrypted config deployed
through CI servers. Applications
read through environment
variables

Secrets management for mobile
app

No secrets maintained in the app
bundle

Customers

NDA added to all contracts

Employees

NDA added to all contracts

Security Audit

On demand. Latest report
performed for a dedicated
deployment​
​
Android Leadership for Equity_ Tea…
Webapp Leadership for Equity_ AVN…

6

Avni Platform : Data Handling - Access and Sharing of Data
1.​ Authentication: Data in all the applications is accessible only to authenticated users. It
is the user's responsibility to ensure that they are keeping a strong password so that it
cannot be guessed by another human or brute force attack.
2.​ Protection of database: The database resides within the internal VPC of AWS, and is
not publicly accessible. The only way to access the database is through the interfaces
provided by Avni, namely the Android application, the web application and the reporting
systems. It is protected against accidental deletion, and has PITR (Point in Time
Restore) mechanism to restore to any point of time. This protects us from disasters and
data corruption.
3.​ Authorization / Access Controls: a. Avni provides the ability to restrict access to
functions to specific users through user roles and detailed privileges. b. Only relevant
data is made available to the users for their catchments.
4.​ Encryption in transit: Applications when communicating with each other use encryption
via HTTPS protocol.
5.​ Vulnerabilities from Libraries: All the libraries and certificates are regularly upgraded
to prevent new vulnerabilities.
6.​ Protection of PIIs: There is no additional protection of PII or any other sensitive
information once downloaded from the system in the form of spreadsheets by an
authenticated and authorised user using reports.

Data Storage [Data at Rest]
1.​ Security and encryption of data at Rest: a). The android field application has an
option to store data in an encrypted form. We also rely on android security measures to
ensure that other apps don’t have non-authenticated access to Avni’s data. b).
Samanvay cloud service uses Amazon cloud storage (AWS) for storage of data on the
cloud. Samanvay uses Amazon RDS encryption to secure the DB instances and
snapshots at rest. Amazon RDS encryption uses the industry standard AES-256
encryption algorithm to encrypt the data on the server that hosts the DB instance. AWS
RDS encryption also ensures that Amazon doesn’t have access to the database and its
contents.
2.​ Data within the country boundaries: Samanvay uses the Amazon data centres from
India (Mumbai AZ) to store the data.
3.​ Access for Troubleshooting purposes: Authorised Samanvay team members have
access to data for troubleshooting purposes. Samanvay and its members will be bound
by Non disclosure agreement between NGO partner and Samanvay.

7

Privacy
Samanvay performs the role of a Data Processor as provided in the Digital Personal Data
Protection Act, 2023. As part of this, we ensure that the data is secure, accessible only to
authorised users, and any requests for PII removal are done on request of our partner. We also
provide notice on breach of data within the platform.
We expect our partners to ensure management of consent, data minimisation, and route any
request to delete data on behalf of the data principal.

8

